opencog/persist/sexpr/README.md, before:

Atomese S-Expressions
---------------------
Read and write UTF-8 Atomese s-expression strings. This is a collection
of utilities that take Atomese s-expressions and convert then into
in-RAM Atoms and Values living in an AtomSpace. It is intended to make
it easy and fast to serialize and deserialize AtomSpace contents, so
as to save Atomese in a file, or ship it over the network.

The code is meant to be "fast", because it is nearly an order of
magnitude (10x) faster than passing the same contents through the
scheme/guile interfaces. The speed is in fact roughy comparable to
working with Atoms directly, in that it takes about the same amount
of CPU time to string-compare, string-substring, string-increment,
as it does to create Atoms and place them in the AtomSpace. (Yes,
we measured. Results were a mostly-even 50-50 split.)

Only Atomese s-expressions, plus a very special subset of other
functions are supported. This is NOT a generic scheme interpreter.

The code includes a file-reader utility.  It also implements the
`FileStorageNode`, while implements some of the `StorageNode` API.
Entire AtomSpaces can be read and written. Individual Atoms can be
written. More complex queries offered by `StorageNode` are not
supported (because, obviously, flat files aren't databases. Use the
`RocksStorageNode` if you need a full-featured file-backed
`StorageNode`.)

C++ API
-------
The `fast_load.h` file defines the C++ API.

Python API
----------
There's a python wrapper for this, somewhere. Not sure where.

Scheme API
----------
The fast file loader loads Atomese formatted as scheme. So, of course,
you could just use the scheme `load` function!  But this can be slow,
painfully slow. The fast loader provides a 10x performance improvement.

Use it like so:
```
(use-modules (opencog))
(use-modules (opencog persist-file))

(load-file "/some/path/to/atomese.scm")
```

where `atomese.scm` contains Atomese. The contents of the AtomSpace can
be written out by saying `(export-all-atoms "/tmp/atomese.scm")`. The
`export-atoms`, `cog-prt-atomspace` and `prt-atom-list` are useful for
writing Atoms to a file.

* `export-atoms LST FILENAME` -- Export the atoms in LST to FILENAME.
* `prt-atom-list PORT LST`    -- Print a list LST of atoms to PORT.
  Prints the list of atoms LST to PORT, but only those atoms
  without an incoming set.
* `export-all-atoms FILENAME` -- Export entire atomspace into file

Example:
```
(define fp (open-file "/tmp/foo.scm" "w"))
(prt-atom-list fp (list (Concept "a")))
(close fp)
```

`StorageNode` API
-----------------
The `FileStorageNode` atom implements some of the `StorageNode` API.
I'ts just enough to save and load entire AtomSpaces, or to store
individual Atoms.  Here's a short example of writing selected Atoms,
and the entire AtomSpace, to a file. See also `persist-store.scm` in
the main examples directory.

```
(use-modules (opencog) (opencog persist) (opencog persist-file))

; Populate the AtomSpace with some data.
(define a (Concept "foo"))
(cog-set-value! a (Predicate "num") (FloatValue 1 2 3))
(cog-set-value! a (Predicate "str") (StringValue "p" "q" "r"))

(define li (Link (Concept "foo") (Concept "bar")))
(cog-set-value! li (Predicate "num") (FloatValue 4 5 6))
(cog-set-value! li (Predicate "str") (StringValue "x" "y" "z"))

; Store some individual Atoms, and then store everything.
(define fsn (FileStorageNode "/tmp/foo.scm"))
(cog-open fsn)
(store-atom a fsn)
(store-value a (Predicate "num") fsn)
(store-value a (Predicate "num") fsn)
(store-value a (Predicate "num") fsn)
(barrier fsn)

(store-atomspace fsn)  ; Store everything.
(cog-close fsn)
```

Here's an example of reading back what was stored above:
```
(use-modules (opencog) (opencog persist) (opencog persist-file))

(define fsn (FileStorageNode "/tmp/foo.scm"))
(cog-open fsn)
(load-atomspace fsn)
(cog-close fsn)

; Verify the load
(cog-prt-atomspace)

(define li (Link (Concept "foo") (Concept "bar")))
(cog-keys li)
(cog-value li (Predicate "num"))
(cog-value li (Predicate "str"))
```


Network API
-----------
The CogServer provides a network API to send/receive Atoms over the
internet. The actual API is that of the StorageNode (see the wiki page
https://wiki.opencog.org/w/StorageNode for details.) The cogserver
supports the full `StorageNode` API, and it uses the code in this
directory in order to make it fast.

To aid in performance, a very special set of about 15 scheme functions
have been hard-coded in C++. These are implemented in `Commands.cc`
The goal is to avoid the overhead of entry/exit into guile. This works
because the cogserver is guaranteed to send only these commands, and no
others.

Commit message:

Add notes about the commands dispatcher

opencog/persist/sexpr/README.md, after:

Atomese S-Expressions
---------------------
Read and write UTF-8 Atomese s-expression strings. This is a collection
of utilities that take Atomese s-expressions and convert then into
in-RAM Atoms and Values living in an AtomSpace. It is intended to make
it easy and fast to serialize and deserialize AtomSpace contents, so
as to save Atomese in a file, or ship it over the network.

The code is meant to be "fast", because it is nearly an order of
magnitude (10x) faster than passing the same contents through the
scheme/guile interfaces. The speed is in fact roughy comparable to
working with Atoms directly, in that it takes about the same amount
of CPU time to string-compare, string-substring, string-increment,
as it does to create Atoms and place them in the AtomSpace. (Yes,
we measured. Results were a mostly-even 50-50 split.)

Only Atomese s-expressions, plus a very special subset of other
functions are supported. This is NOT a generic scheme interpreter.

The code includes a file-reader utility.  It also implements the
`FileStorageNode`, while implements some of the `StorageNode` API.
Entire AtomSpaces can be read and written. Individual Atoms can be
written. More complex queries offered by `StorageNode` are not
supported (because, obviously, flat files aren't databases. Use the
`RocksStorageNode` if you need a full-featured file-backed
`StorageNode`.)

C++ API
-------
The `fast_load.h` file defines the C++ API.

Python API
----------
There's a python wrapper for this, somewhere. Not sure where.

Scheme API
----------
The fast file loader loads Atomese formatted as scheme. So, of course,
you could just use the scheme `load` function!  But this can be slow,
painfully slow. The fast loader provides a 10x performance improvement.

Use it like so:
```
(use-modules (opencog))
(use-modules (opencog persist-file))

(load-file "/some/path/to/atomese.scm")
```

where `atomese.scm` contains Atomese. The contents of the AtomSpace can
be written out by saying `(export-all-atoms "/tmp/atomese.scm")`. The
`export-atoms`, `cog-prt-atomspace` and `prt-atom-list` are useful for
writing Atoms to a file.

* `export-atoms LST FILENAME` -- Export the atoms in LST to FILENAME.
* `prt-atom-list PORT LST`    -- Print a list LST of atoms to PORT.
  Prints the list of atoms LST to PORT, but only those atoms
  without an incoming set.
* `export-all-atoms FILENAME` -- Export entire atomspace into file

Example:
```
(define fp (open-file "/tmp/foo.scm" "w"))
(prt-atom-list fp (list (Concept "a")))
(close fp)
```

`StorageNode` API
-----------------
The `FileStorageNode` atom implements some of the `StorageNode` API.
I'ts just enough to save and load entire AtomSpaces, or to store
individual Atoms.  Here's a short example of writing selected Atoms,
and the entire AtomSpace, to a file. See also `persist-store.scm` in
the main examples directory.

```
(use-modules (opencog) (opencog persist) (opencog persist-file))

; Populate the AtomSpace with some data.
(define a (Concept "foo"))
(cog-set-value! a (Predicate "num") (FloatValue 1 2 3))
(cog-set-value! a (Predicate "str") (StringValue "p" "q" "r"))

(define li (Link (Concept "foo") (Concept "bar")))
(cog-set-value! li (Predicate "num") (FloatValue 4 5 6))
(cog-set-value! li (Predicate "str") (StringValue "x" "y" "z"))

; Store some individual Atoms, and then store everything.
(define fsn (FileStorageNode "/tmp/foo.scm"))
(cog-open fsn)
(store-atom a fsn)
(store-value a (Predicate "num") fsn)
(store-value a (Predicate "num") fsn)
(store-value a (Predicate "num") fsn)
(barrier fsn)

(store-atomspace fsn)  ; Store everything.
(cog-close fsn)
```

Here's an example of reading back what was stored above:
```
(use-modules (opencog) (opencog persist) (opencog persist-file))

(define fsn (FileStorageNode "/tmp/foo.scm"))
(cog-open fsn)
(load-atomspace fsn)
(cog-close fsn)

; Verify the load
(cog-prt-atomspace)

(define li (Link (Concept "foo") (Concept "bar")))
(cog-keys li)
(cog-value li (Predicate "num"))
(cog-value li (Predicate "str"))
```


Network API, Command Dispatching
--------------------------------
The CogServer provides a network API to send/receive Atoms over the
internet. The actual API is that of the StorageNode (see the wiki page
https://wiki.opencog.org/w/StorageNode for details.) The cogserver
supports the full `StorageNode` API, and it uses the code in this
directory in order to make it fast.

To aid in performance, a very special set of about 15 scheme functions
have been hard-coded in C++. These are implemented in `Commands.cc`
The goal is to avoid the overhead of entry/exit into guile. This works
because the cogserver is guaranteed to send only these commands, and no
others.

Network-distributed AtomSpaces need to have proxy agents that know what
to do with the data being passed around.  Besides just workig with the
attached AtomSpace, maybe something more needs to be done: maybe data
needs to be written to or read from disk. The proxy agent determines
what is to be done.

To implement the proxy, one needs to intercept network commands, as they
come in. This spot is the `interpret_command()` method in `Commands.cc`.
The `class Command` maintains a table of functions to be called, one for
each network command.  By altering this table and installing command
handlers other than the default handlers, the proxy agent can respond
in some custom fashion.

For example, if the CogServer receives a command to put an Atom into the
AtomSpace, it can then immediately push it out to any open `StorageNode`s,
for example, to disk storage. This becomes an easy way to implement a
write-through proxy, which just listens to connections on the net, and,
whenever it receives some Atom, it just pushes it to disk.`

For details, see https://github.com/opencog/atomspace-agents
