opencog/atoms/README.md, before:


Atoms
=====

This directory contains C++ implementations of many (but not all)
atom types as C++ classes (some atom types do not need an underlying
C++ class to make them work).

The goal of having a C++ class is two-fold. One is to implement methods
that "do something" for that atom type. For example, the `PlusLink` can
actually add numbers together, in addition to holding the symbolic
expressions to be added.  Another goal of having C++ classes is that
they allow caching, pre-processing and memoization. For example, the
pattern matcher needs to know where all the variables are in a pattern;
the `PatternLink` pre-analyzes the pattern and memoizes the variable
locations. The `PatternLink` holds the "compiled" version of the
pattern.

See the [README](../README.md) one level down for a quick definition
of what an Atom is.

See the [AtomSpace README](../atomspace/README.md) for a discussion of
design tradeoffs, and of the current implementation.

Subdirectories
--------------
Listed in order of dependency:

 * `atom_types` -- The `atom_types.script` file in this directory
   declares the `Value` and `Atom` type hierarchy. Includes the
   `nameserver`, which provides misc run-time services, describing
   the type hierarchy and the names of types.

 * `value` -- The C++ base class for Atoms and for Values. The
   `FloatValue`, `StringValue` and `LinkValue` are defined here.

 * `truthvalue` -- various kinds of `TruthValue`s are defined here.

 * `base` -- The C++ base classes for `Atom`, `Node` and `Link` are
   defined here. The Atom factory (aka `classserver`) is defined here.

 * `core` -- A large collection of Atoms that have "fairly simple"
   C++ classes behind them.  Here, "fairly simple" means that they do
   not depend on other C++ subsystems, such as scheme, python, the
   pattern matcher, etc.

 * `flow` -- Atoms that move (get/set) Values from/to Atoms.

 * `pattern` -- Atoms involved with searching for pattern: `QueryLink`,
   `MeetLink`, `DualLink`, `SatisfactionLink`, `SatisfactionSetLink`.
   These are all quite complicated, and cache various pre-compiled
   parts of the pattern.

 * `container` -- Simpilar to the pattern queries, but these look
   "upwards" instead of "downwards". Thus, `JoinLink` is here
   (contrasted to `MeetLink` above)

 * `execution` -- miscellaneous executable/evaluatable atoms. Much of
   the code here should probably migrate to per-atom-type C++ classes.

 * `grounded` -- "black-box" executable/evaluatable nodes, that is,
   `GroundedPredicateNode` and `GroundedSchemaNode`.  These interact
    with the scheme, python and haskell evaluators.

 * `reduct` -- inspired by comboreduct, these are "clearbox" links:
   `PlusLink`, `TimesLink`, etc. They not only represent arithmetic
   formulas, but can also add and multiply numbers.  They are
   "clearbox" because they not only "do something" (like the black-box
   Atoms), but we also know what they do.  For example, `PlusLink` adds
   numbers.  By contrast, it is impossible to know what some black-box
   might do. Thus, we can apply reasoning and deduction to the clearbox
   links, which is impossible for the black-box links.

Commit message:

Add a README to the foreign directory.

opencog/atoms/README.md, after:


Atoms
=====

This directory contains C++ implementations of many (but not all)
atom types as C++ classes (some atom types do not need an underlying
C++ class to make them work).

The goal of having a C++ class is two-fold. One is to implement methods
that "do something" for that atom type. For example, the `PlusLink`
can actually add numbers together, as well as holding the symbolic
expressions to be added.  Another goal of having C++ classes is that
they allow caching, pre-processing and memoization. For example, the
pattern matcher needs to know where all the variables are in a pattern;
the `PatternLink` pre-analyzes the pattern and memoizes the variable
locations. The `PatternLink` holds the "compiled" version of the
pattern.

See the [README](../README.md) one level down for a quick definition
of what an Atom is.

See the [AtomSpace README](../atomspace/README.md) for a discussion of
design tradeoffs, and of the current implementation.

Subdirectories
--------------
Listed in order of dependency:

 * `atom_types` -- The `atom_types.script` file in this directory
   declares the `Value` and `Atom` type hierarchy. Includes the
   `nameserver`, which provides misc run-time services, describing
   the type hierarchy and the names of types.

 * `value` -- The C++ base class for Atoms and for Values. The
   `FloatValue`, `StringValue` and `LinkValue` are defined here.

 * `truthvalue` -- various kinds of `TruthValue`s are defined here.

 * `base` -- The C++ base classes for `Atom`, `Node` and `Link` are
   defined here. The Atom factory (aka `classserver`) is defined here.

 * `core` -- A large collection of Atoms that have "fairly simple"
   C++ classes behind them.  Here, "fairly simple" means that they do
   not depend on other C++ subsystems, such as scheme, python, the
   pattern matcher, etc.

 * `flow` -- Atoms that move (get/set) Values from/to Atoms.

 * `pattern` -- Atoms involved with searching for pattern: `QueryLink`,
   `MeetLink`, `DualLink`, `SatisfactionLink`, `SatisfactionSetLink`.
   These are all quite complicated, and cache various pre-compiled
   parts of the pattern.

 * `container` -- Similar to the pattern queries, but these look
   "upwards" instead of "downwards". Thus, `JoinLink` is here
   (contrasted to `MeetLink` above)

 * `execution` -- miscellaneous executable/evaluatable atoms. Much of
   the code here should probably migrate to per-atom-type C++ classes.

 * `parallel` -- Links types that can launch multiple threads (and join
   them again) when executed.

 * `grounded` -- "black-box" executable/evaluatable nodes, that is,
   `GroundedPredicateNode` and `GroundedSchemaNode`.  These interact
    with the scheme, python and haskell evaluators.

 * `reduct` -- inspired by comboreduct, these are "clearbox" links:
   `PlusLink`, `TimesLink`, etc. They not only represent arithmetic
   formulas, but can also add and multiply numbers.  They are
   "clearbox" because they not only "do something" (like the black-box
   Atoms), but we also know what they do.  For example, `PlusLink` adds
   numbers.  By contrast, it is impossible to know what some black-box
   might do. Thus, we can apply reasoning and deduction to the clearbox
   links, which is impossible for the black-box links.

 * `foreign` -- an experiment in its early stages to map arbitrary
   languages into the atomspace. That is, the AtomSpace stores trees,
   and the source code of pretty much all programming languages can be
   converted into abstract syntax trees (AST's). These trees can be
   stored in the AtomSpace. All that's missing is some pretty-printing:
   wrappers to convert those trees into AtomSpace trees, and the
   converse: print them back out again, in the expected format.
