#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options false
\begin_modules
theorems-ams
eqs-within-sections
figs-within-sections
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "helvet" "default"
\font_typewriter "courier" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder false
\pdf_colorlinks false
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 2
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Pattern matching
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Linas Vepstas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
5 Sept 2020
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
A discussion of pattern matching and also sheaves and the ram and CPU usage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The connectors-and-sheaves concepts sketched in this series of texts provide
 a different way of representing graphs, and working with them.
 This representation is not just abstract nonsense, but has actual implications
 for RAM and CPU consumption.
 The current prototype experiments with sheaves are layered on top of the
 OpenCog AtomSpace, which is an in-RAM database for storing generalized
 hypergraphs or 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

metagraphs
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 It has it's own distinct representation, with certain implications for
 CPU and RAM utilization.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The goal of this text is to look at these three systems, and compare how
 they use RAM and CPU resources.
 Describing the AtomSpace is the easiest, because the current implementation
 has a specific form.
 Describing a graph database is a bit harder, as we assume a generic, naive
 design, which actual implementations may or may not follow.
 Describing the connectionist database presents similar trouble: without
 a specific implementation and the experience from using it, statements
 have to be generalized.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Each of these is described in turn, followed by a discussion of algorithms.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Summary
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Key points:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Metatrees can be thought of as either s-expressions or as json.
 But with a cactch...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Walks are explicit: one moves up or down the trees e.g.
 the car, cdr of lisp, but also the tinkerpop/gremlin primitives for graph-walki
ng.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Tree walks are a prime example of a recursive algorithm, requiring a stack
 machine to execute, and describable by a context-free grammar.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
This means tree walks can be automated.
 Rather than designing a search query where the user explicitly states the
 walk/path to be performed (tinkerpop/gremlin), a context-free grammar can
 be used to describe the search, which is then executed by the stack machine.
 This is what 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

pattern matching
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 actually is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Connectors and Sheaves
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Only now do we get to the main act...
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Specifying (context-free) grammars in a natural way.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Parsing as jigsaw-puzzle assembly
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
RAM and CPU costs of storing jigsaw pieces
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
