opencog/haskell/README.md, before:

Haskell Bindings for OpenCog:
============================

This directory contains the implementation of Haskell bindings for the AtomSpace.

GSoC 2015 - Haskell Bindings.

**Student:** Marcos Pividori

**Mentor:** Nil Geisweiller

For general information on haskell bindings you can visit the wiki page:
[Haskell](http://wiki.opencog.org/w/Haskell)

For in depth information on the implementation and project details:
[Haskell Bindings - GSoC 2015](http://wiki.opencog.org/w/Haskell_Bindings_-_GSoC_2015)

### Requirements

To use the Haskell bindings, it is necessary to have installed:

* [Stack](https://github.com/commercialhaskell/stack/wiki) (Haskell development tool)

To install Stack, you should follow [Download instructions](https://github.com/commercialhaskell/stack/wiki/Downloads)

### Installation

Go through the normal process of
[building](https://github.com/opencog/atomspace#building-atomspace) and
[installing](https://github.com/opencog/atomspace#install) the AtomSpace.

This will automatically build the haskell library.

If you want to use this library in some project you should include it to the
package list on the project [stack.yaml](https://github.com/commercialhaskell/stack/wiki/stack.yaml) config file. For example:

```yaml
...
packages:
- <ATOMSPACE_ROOT>/opencog/haskell
...
```

On the other hand, if you simply want to compile some code using this
library, you should compile with:

```
export STACK_YAML=<ATOMSPACE_ROOT>/opencog/haskell/stack.yaml
stack ghc example.hs
```

For using ghci:

```
export STACK_YAML=<ATOMSPACE_ROOT>/opencog/haskell/stack.yaml
stack ghci --ghc-options -lhaskell-atomspace
```

Or, to avoid defining STACK_YAML every time, you can include this library to your
local environment, adding this library path to your package
list in your local config file:
~/.stack/global/stack.yaml ,and then running:

```
stack install opencog-atomspace
```

Then you can compile simple .hs files with:
```
stack ghc example.hs
```

(It is necessary to previously build and install the AtomSpace, because the
opencog-atomspace haskell library
depends on the haskell-atomspace C wrapper library)

### Documentation
To generate proper [Haddock](https://www.haskell.org/haddock/) documentation,
you should go to the build directory and execute:
```
make doxygen
```
Then you can open the OpenCog documentation (build/doc/html/index.html),
go to "OpenCog source code documentation - Libraries - Haskell bindings
library" and click on the "opencog-atomspace" link.

### Usage

To use the opencog-atomspace haskell library, we just import the modules like:
```haskell
import OpenCog.AtomSpace
...
```

You can find many examples on the [examples/haskell](../../examples/haskell)
directory.

### AtomSpace Environment

The main idea is to build programs that work on an AtomSpace on the
Monad 'AtomSpace'.
Then, we can run this programs with the function runOnNewAtomSpace:

```haskell
runOnNewAtomSpace :: AtomSpace a -> IO a
```

It creates a new C++ atomspace behind, does all the computation, and finally
deletes it.

The AtomSpace data type is defined as:

```haskell
type AtomSpace = ReaderT AtomSpaceRef IO
```

ReaderT is a monad transformer, so in fact:

```haskell
AtomSpace a = ReaderT { runReaderT :: AtomSpaceRef -> IO a }
```

The interpretation of runReaderT in this case is:  "given an atomspace in
memory, it reduces to performing IO actions with a result of type a"

Because of the use of the monad IO, we can lift IO actions inside the
monad AtomSpace, through the use of liftIO. For example:

```haskell
import OpenCog.AtomSpace.Api
import Control.Monad.IO.Class

prog :: AtomSpace ()
prog = do
        liftIO $ putStrLn "hello world"
        ...

main :: IO ()
main = runOnNewAtomSpace prog

```

###Main functions:

####insert:
Function to insert atoms to the atomspace. To create new atoms or just to
update the mutable information of a specific atom.
```haskell
insert :: Atom a -> AtomSpace ()
```
####get:
Function to get an atom back from the atomspace.
```haskell
get :: Atom a -> AtomSpace (Maybe (Atom a))
```
####remove:
Function to remove atoms from the atomspace.
```haskell
remove :: Atom a -> AtomSpace Bool
```
####printAtom
Function to show the given atom in opencog notation.
```haskell
printAtom :: Atom a -> IO ()
```
####debug:
Debug function to print the state of the atomspace on stderr.
```haskell
debug :: AtomSpace ()
```

Commit message:

Remove stack setup from cmake.

opencog/haskell/README.md, after:

Haskell Bindings for OpenCog:
============================

This directory contains the implementation of Haskell bindings for the AtomSpace.

GSoC 2015 - Haskell Bindings.

**Student:** Marcos Pividori

**Mentor:** Nil Geisweiller

For general information on haskell bindings you can visit the wiki page:
[Haskell](http://wiki.opencog.org/w/Haskell)

For in depth information on the implementation and project details:
[Haskell Bindings - GSoC 2015](http://wiki.opencog.org/w/Haskell_Bindings_-_GSoC_2015)

### Requirements

To use the Haskell bindings, it is necessary to have installed:

* [Stack](https://github.com/commercialhaskell/stack/wiki) (Haskell development tool)

To install Stack, you should follow [Download instructions](https://github.com/commercialhaskell/stack/wiki/Downloads)

### Installation

To check if you have proper ghc version installed. Run:
```
cd <ATOMSPACE_ROOT>/opencog/haskell
stack setup
```

Then, go through the normal process of
[building](https://github.com/opencog/atomspace#building-atomspace) and
[installing](https://github.com/opencog/atomspace#install) the AtomSpace.

This will automatically build the haskell library.

If you want to use this library in some project you should include it to the
package list on the project [stack.yaml](https://github.com/commercialhaskell/stack/wiki/stack.yaml) config file. For example:

```yaml
...
packages:
- <ATOMSPACE_ROOT>/opencog/haskell
...
```

On the other hand, if you simply want to compile some code using this
library, you should compile with:

```
export STACK_YAML=<ATOMSPACE_ROOT>/opencog/haskell/stack.yaml
stack ghc example.hs
```

For using ghci:

```
export STACK_YAML=<ATOMSPACE_ROOT>/opencog/haskell/stack.yaml
stack ghci --ghc-options -lhaskell-atomspace
```

Or, to avoid defining STACK_YAML every time, you can include this library to your
local environment, adding this library path to your package
list in your local config file:
~/.stack/global/stack.yaml ,and then running:

```
stack install opencog-atomspace
```

Then you can compile simple .hs files with:
```
stack ghc example.hs
```

(It is necessary to previously build and install the AtomSpace, because the
opencog-atomspace haskell library
depends on the haskell-atomspace C wrapper library)

### Documentation
To generate proper [Haddock](https://www.haskell.org/haddock/) documentation,
you should go to the build directory and execute:
```
make doxygen
```
Then you can open the OpenCog documentation (build/doc/html/index.html),
go to "OpenCog source code documentation - Libraries - Haskell bindings
library" and click on the "opencog-atomspace" link.

### Usage

To use the opencog-atomspace haskell library, we just import the modules like:
```haskell
import OpenCog.AtomSpace
...
```

You can find many examples on the [examples/haskell](../../examples/haskell)
directory.

### AtomSpace Environment

The main idea is to build programs that work on an AtomSpace on the
Monad 'AtomSpace'.
Then, we can run this programs with the function runOnNewAtomSpace:

```haskell
runOnNewAtomSpace :: AtomSpace a -> IO a
```

It creates a new C++ atomspace behind, does all the computation, and finally
deletes it.

The AtomSpace data type is defined as:

```haskell
type AtomSpace = ReaderT AtomSpaceRef IO
```

ReaderT is a monad transformer, so in fact:

```haskell
AtomSpace a = ReaderT { runReaderT :: AtomSpaceRef -> IO a }
```

The interpretation of runReaderT in this case is:  "given an atomspace in
memory, it reduces to performing IO actions with a result of type a"

Because of the use of the monad IO, we can lift IO actions inside the
monad AtomSpace, through the use of liftIO. For example:

```haskell
import OpenCog.AtomSpace.Api
import Control.Monad.IO.Class

prog :: AtomSpace ()
prog = do
        liftIO $ putStrLn "hello world"
        ...

main :: IO ()
main = runOnNewAtomSpace prog

```

###Main functions:

####insert:
Function to insert atoms to the atomspace. To create new atoms or just to
update the mutable information of a specific atom.
```haskell
insert :: Atom a -> AtomSpace ()
```
####get:
Function to get an atom back from the atomspace.
```haskell
get :: Atom a -> AtomSpace (Maybe (Atom a))
```
####remove:
Function to remove atoms from the atomspace.
```haskell
remove :: Atom a -> AtomSpace Bool
```
####printAtom
Function to show the given atom in opencog notation.
```haskell
printAtom :: Atom a -> IO ()
```
####debug:
Debug function to print the state of the atomspace on stderr.
```haskell
debug :: AtomSpace ()
```
