opencog/persist/json/README.md, before:

Atomese in JSON
---------------
Read and write UTF-8 Atomese JSON expressions. This is a collection
of utilities that take Atomese JSON expressions and convert then into
in-RAM Atoms and Values living in an AtomSpace. It is intended to make
it easy for developers to write WebApps, Javascript apps, and so on.

To allow the remote app to communicate with the AtomSpace, a small
number of special commands have been hard-coded. These commands are
just enough to interact with the AtomSpace, and nothing more.


Network API
-----------
The CogServer provides a network API to send/receive Atoms over the
internet. See https://wiki.opencog.org/w/CogServer It uses the code
here to provide a newtork interface to the JSON code here.

Examples
--------
First, create an AtomSpace, put some atoms into it, and start the
CogServer. This is as usual, starting at the `bash` prompt: 
```
$ guile
(use-modules (opencog) (opencog cogserver))
(start-cogserver)
(List (Concept "foo") (Concept "bar"))
(cog-set-value! (ConceptNode "foo") (Predicate "key") (FloatValue 1 2 3))
(cog-set-tv! (ConceptNode "foo") (SimpleTruthValue 0.3 0.8))
(cog-set-tv! (ConceptNode "bar") (stv 0.4 0.5))
```

Now create a network connection to talk to the CogServer, and send it
an assortment of "javascript" commands. The replies will be in JSON.
```
$ rlwrap telnet localhost 17001
help
help json
json
AtomSpace.getAtoms("Node")  // Get all Nodes, including ConceptNodes
AtomSpace.getAtoms("Node", false) // Get only Nodes
AtomSpace.getAtoms("Atom", true)  // Get all Atoms
AtomSpace.haveNode("Concept", "foo")    // Yes, that exists
AtomSpace.haveNode("Concept", "foobooboo")  // Does not exist
AtomSpace.haveLink("List", [{"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}]) // Nope.
AtomSpace.haveLink("List", [{"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}, {"type": "Concept", "name": "bar"}]) // Yes.
AtomSpace.haveAtom({"type": "List", "outgoing":[{"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}, {"type": "Concept", "name": "bar"}]}) // Yes
AtomSpace.haveAtom({"type": "List", "outgoing":[{"type": "Concept", "name": "ding"}, {"type": "Concept", "name": "dong"}]}) // No
AtomSpace.getIncoming({"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}) // Incoming set
AtomSpace.getIncoming({"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}, "List") // OK
AtomSpace.getIncoming({"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}, "EvaluationLink") // Empty
AtomSpace.getIncoming({"type": "Concept", "name": "bbb"}) // Empty list
AtomSpace.getValues({ "type": "Concept", "name": "foo"})  // All values
AtomSpace.getValues({ "type": "Concept", "name": "bar"})  // All values
```

Example output:
```
json> AtomSpace.getIncoming({"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"})

[{
  "type": "ListLink",
  "outgoing": [
    {
      "type": "ConceptNode",
      "name": "foo"
    },
    {
      "type": "ConceptNode",
      "name": "bar"
    }]}]
```

JavaScript API
--------------
Version 0.0.0 of a JavaScript API for this thing can be found at
https://github.com/opencog/atomspace-js

Commit message:

Add status to the README

opencog/persist/json/README.md, after:

Atomese in JSON
===============
Read and write UTF-8 Atomese JSON expressions. This is a collection
of utilities that take Atomese JSON expressions and convert then into
in-RAM Atoms and Values living in an AtomSpace. It is intended to make
it easy for developers to write WebApps, Javascript apps, and so on.

To allow the remote app to communicate with the AtomSpace, a small
number of special commands have been hard-coded. These commands are
just enough to interact with the AtomSpace, and nothing more.

Status
------
**Version 0.8.0.** There is just enough here to be usable for basic things.
Still missing is the ability to update the AtomSpace via JSON, and the
ability to run arbitrary queries. Adding support for this is **really
easy**, and just slightly tedious.  The hard part is writing the docs!
See the neighboring directory `../sexpr/Commands.cc` for explict
examples of how to implement what's missing.  Patches are solicited and
will be accepted.


Network API
-----------
The CogServer provides a network API to send/receive Atoms over the
internet. See https://wiki.opencog.org/w/CogServer It uses the code
here to provide a newtork interface to the JSON code here.

Examples
--------
First, create an AtomSpace, put some atoms into it, and start the
CogServer. This is as usual, starting at the `bash` prompt: 
```
$ guile
(use-modules (opencog) (opencog cogserver))
(start-cogserver)
(List (Concept "foo") (Concept "bar"))
(cog-set-value! (ConceptNode "foo") (Predicate "key") (FloatValue 1 2 3))
(cog-set-tv! (ConceptNode "foo") (SimpleTruthValue 0.3 0.8))
(cog-set-tv! (ConceptNode "bar") (stv 0.4 0.5))
```

Now create a network connection to talk to the CogServer, and send it
an assortment of "javascript" commands. The replies will be in JSON.
```
$ rlwrap telnet localhost 17001
help
help json
json
AtomSpace.getAtoms("Node")  // Get all Nodes, including ConceptNodes
AtomSpace.getAtoms("Node", false) // Get only Nodes
AtomSpace.getAtoms("Atom", true)  // Get all Atoms
AtomSpace.haveNode("Concept", "foo")    // Yes, that exists
AtomSpace.haveNode("Concept", "foobooboo")  // Does not exist
AtomSpace.haveLink("List", [{"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}]) // Nope.
AtomSpace.haveLink("List", [{"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}, {"type": "Concept", "name": "bar"}]) // Yes.
AtomSpace.haveAtom({"type": "List", "outgoing":[{"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}, {"type": "Concept", "name": "bar"}]}) // Yes
AtomSpace.haveAtom({"type": "List", "outgoing":[{"type": "Concept", "name": "ding"}, {"type": "Concept", "name": "dong"}]}) // No
AtomSpace.getIncoming({"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}) // Incoming set
AtomSpace.getIncoming({"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}, "List") // OK
AtomSpace.getIncoming({"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"}, "EvaluationLink") // Empty
AtomSpace.getIncoming({"type": "Concept", "name": "bbb"}) // Empty list
AtomSpace.getValues({ "type": "Concept", "name": "foo"})  // All values
AtomSpace.getValues({ "type": "Concept", "name": "bar"})  // All values
```

Example output:
```
json> AtomSpace.getIncoming({"type": "Concept", "name": "foo"})

[{
  "type": "ListLink",
  "outgoing": [
    {
      "type": "ConceptNode",
      "name": "foo"
    },
    {
      "type": "ConceptNode",
      "name": "bar"
    }]}]
```

JavaScript API
--------------
Version 0.0.0 of a JavaScript API for this thing can be found at
https://github.com/opencog/atomspace-js
